# IoT-based-low-navigability-detector
Bangladesh is a land of rivers. From our ancient history and culture we can see a great importance of our inland waterways and most important of them are our rivers.  From the history of human evolution we can easily find out that civilization has always started from the river banks, Not only in our area but in most places of the world. Even if we look towards our present, most of our cities are situated and established in a river banks. For example, our capital Dhaka is situated beside the river Buriganga, Chittagong beside Karnafuli, Rajshahi beside Padma, Sylhet beside Surma, Mymensingh beside Brahmaputra  and so on. The rivers of Bangladesh in one hand connected and on the other hand disconnected our lands. The connections can be established by a water transport system. 
In our history we can find that water transportation was the most popular an oldest transportation system in our area. It was established far beyond any other transportation system has started on our land.   This transportation system has served our need for travel and business both. Goods and products were transported for business from one place to another using this transportation system. The network of our inland waterways including rivers, cannels and ponds had a great influence in establishing our economy. Market places were established beside the river for easy transportation purpose. 
Moreover, our rivers have a great influence on our environment, lifestyle, food habit, culture and most importantly our ecosystem. 
Sedimentation of a river is a very natural process that lessens the navigability of a river. For our geographical position rivers of our country have high sedimentation rate. Besides continuous water pollution, including dumping waste and plastics in water not only causes water pollution, but also responsible for lessen navigability. 
Today, many of our rivers are dried up and may have lost there navigability. This reason has broken down our oldest transportation system. Old market places situated on the river banks for easy transportation are also about to die. Road transportation has taken the place for transporting goods and products through the country. But the road conditions are not the same in all places. Weak and narrow roads can’ t bear the load of heavy transports and break down very easily. The huge number of trucks and lories carrying goods are also responsible for traffic jams and causes trouble for the passengers traveling in public transports. Where a huge opportunity of transportation is just unused dew to right maintenance. Moreover, the lessen navigability is also responsible for defuncting many animals from our rivers. This not only causes lacking of fish in the once rich sources, and effects our food habit but also causes damage to biodiversity and causes imbalance in water ecosystem and food chain by almost vanishing so many rare species of animals.
The purpose of designed system is using technology in a well planed way for the betterment of our transportation system, lifestyle, environment. This planned way of improvement will also help to reserve universal biodiversity along with reviving our oldest transportation system. 
As the main cause of lessen navigability is not dredging at time, I have designed system that can be attached with a water vehicle to measure if the navigability of a water body is right for large water vehicles or not. If it found any waterbody with less navigability it will beep an alarm, lit an indicator and send the location of the water body to a preset number of responsible authority via mobile messaging system using GSM network to ensure dredging in proper time. I have tried to come with a cheap solution so that it won’t be a burden to our economy and can be used easily in practical fields. I have used Arduino Uno, GSM shield, sonar sensor, buzzer and LED. Sonar and GPS technology will identify the location that requires dredging, GSM will transfer the information. Buzzer and LED are cheap optional additions for easily recognizing the place as we don’t memorize latitude and longitude of the place, whenever the device will find a low navigable area, it will indicate that to the present users with its light and sound.
